8.425	Rental Housing – Standards and Protections.
(1) Structural Integrity. Roofs, floors, walls, foundations and all other structural components shall be capable of resisting loads prescribed by the building code in effect at the time of construction.
(2) Plumbing. 
(a) Plumbing systems shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition and shall be free of defects, leaks and obstructions. The presence of significant visible mold may be a symptom of faulty plumbing, however, the presence of mold, by itself, is not a violation for purposes of sections 8.400 through 8.440 of this code.
(b) Repairs must be permanent rather than temporary and shall be through generally accepted plumbing methods. If significant visible mold results from faulty plumbing, repairs must include removing the mold, which may include mold on or in interior walls, sheetrock, insulation, floors, carpets or carpet backing.
(3) Heating. 
(a) A permanently installed heat source able to provide a room temperature of 68 degrees Fahrenheit three feet above the floor, measured in the approximate center of the room, in all habitable rooms. Portable space heaters shall not be used to achieve compliance with this section.
(b) All heating devices or appliances shall conform to applicable law at the time of installation.
(c) Ventilation for fuel-burning heating appliances shall be as required by the Mechanical Code at the time of installation.
(4) Weatherproofing. 
(a) Roof, exterior walls, windows and doors shall be maintained to prevent water intrusion into the building envelope which may cause damage to the structure or its contents or may adversely affect the health of an occupant. The presence of significant visible mold may be a symptom of faulty weatherproofing, however, the presence of mold, by itself, is not a violation for purposes of sections 8.400 through 8.440 of this code.
(b) Repairs must be permanent rather than temporary and shall be through generally accepted construction methods. If significant visible mold results from faulty weatherproofing, repairs must include removing the mold, which may include mold on or in interior walls, sheetrock, insulation, floors, carpets or carpet backing.
(5) Security. Doors and windows leading into a dwelling unit must be equipped with locks and shall be maintained in a condition so as to restrict access into the dwelling unit.
(6) Smoke detectors. Every dwelling unit shall be equipped with an approved and properly functioning smoke alarm or smoke detector installed and maintained in accordance with the state building code, ORS 479.270, 479.275, and 479.285, and applicable rules of the State Fire Marshal.
(7) Carbon Monoxide Alarms. Every dwelling unit that contains a carbon monoxide source shall be equipped with at least one approved and properly functioning carbon monoxide alarm installed and maintained in accordance with State Fire Marshal rules, applicable requirements of the state building code, and the Oregon Revised Statutes. A dwelling unit that is located within a structure that contains a carbon monoxide source and is connected to the room in which the carbon monoxide source is located by a door, ductwork or a ventilation shaft is considered to contain a carbon monoxide source.
(8) Electrical. 
(a) Electrical systems, including electrical outlets, light fixtures and light switches, shall be in good working order.
(b) Electrical systems shall conform to applicable law at the time of installation. Repairs must be permanent rather than temporary and shall be through generally accepted electrical methods.
(9) Appliances. All appliances that are furnished by the landlord, including, but not limited to, refrigerator, range, air conditioner, dishwasher, microwave, clothes washer and dryer, must be in good working order and shall be maintained by the landlord.
(10) Rats. Every dwelling unit must be maintained free of rats. At a minimum, the landlord must comply with the standards set forth in section 6.015 of this code.
(11) Documentation of Condition of Rental Housing. 
(a) Prior to the date a tenant begins to occupy rental housing the landlord shall provide the tenant with documentation of the condition of the rental housing and receive written confirmation from the tenant that the tenant has received and reviewed the documentation.
(b) On or before the date that ORS 90.300 requires a landlord to provide a written accounting stating the basis of a claim for all or any part of a security deposit, the landlord must provide documentation of the condition of the rental housing, as well as a written statement describing the condition or damage the landlord believes justifies the landlord’s refusal to refund the full security deposit, to the individual to whom the security deposit would otherwise be due pursuant to the rental agreement.
(c) Documentation of the condition of rental housing required by this section shall include at least the following information:
1. Photo documentation showing the condition of the rental housing, including the condition of any appliances provided for use by tenants; and
2. A written statement describing the condition of the rental housing, including the condition of any appliances provided for use by tenants, and noting any damage.
(12) References. Within five business days of the date of a tenant’s written request, the tenant’s landlord shall provide the tenant with a reference, utilizing a form approved by the city manager. This subsection does not require a landlord to provide an individual tenant with more than two references during a calendar year.
(13) Tenant Educational Information. At the time a rental agreement is executed, the landlord shall provide each tenant who is a party to the rental agreement a document, in a form approved by the city manager, that includes at least the following information:
(a) The rights and obligations of landlords and tenants related to termination of a tenancy; and
(b) Information about the requirements of this City Rental Housing Code.
(14) Maximum Applicant Screening Charge. The amount of any applicant screening charge may not exceed the amount of an applicant screening charge allowed by ORS 90.295 or $10.00, whichever is less.
(15) Maximum Security Deposit. 
(a) If a landlord requires a security deposit as a condition of tenancy, except as provided in subparagraphs (b) and (c) of this subsection (15), a landlord may not collect a security deposit that exceeds an amount equal to two months’ rent for the dwelling unit.
(b) Notwithstanding subparagraph (a) of this subsection (15), a landlord may require an additional security deposit if the landlord and tenant agree to modify the terms and conditions of the rental agreement to permit a pet or for other cause and the additional security deposit relates to the modification. The additional security deposit authorized by this subparagraph (b) may not exceed an amount equal to one month’s rent for the dwelling unit.
(c) Notwithstanding subparagraph (a) of this subsection (15), a landlord may require an additional security deposit if the landlord enters into a rental agreement with a tenant whose rental housing application the landlord could have denied pursuant to ORS 90.304. The additional security deposit authorized by this subparagraph (c) may not exceed an amount equal to one month’s rent for the dwelling unit.
(d) If a landlord requires an additional security deposit authorized by subparagraphs (b) or (c) of this subsection (15), the landlord must allow the tenant at least three months to pay the additional security deposit.
(e) In addition to the security deposits authorized by subparagraphs (a) through (c) of this subsection (15), a landlord may collect a separate pet deposit unless the tenant’s pet is a service animal or companion animal that a tenant with a disability requires as a reasonable accommodation under fair housing laws.
(16) Applications Processed in Order Received. 
(a) If a landlord advertises the availability of a dwelling unit, the landlord must specify in the notice advertising the dwelling unit the date and time that the landlord will begin accepting rental applications as well as the open application period. The notice advertising the dwelling unit must also inform applicants of the ability to request additional time to ensure that applicants have meaningful access to the rental housing application. The notice advertising the dwelling unit may provide the landlord’s contact information and/or a website address, internet link, or other written method of communicating information to prospective tenants.
(b) A landlord must digitally or manually record the date and time of receipt of each rental housing application received during an open application period. If a rental housing application is received by a landlord prior to the start of the open application period, the landlord must digitally or manually record the date and time of receipt of that application as 8 hours after the start of the open application period.
(c) A landlord may simultaneously process multiple rental housing applications, but must accept, conditionally accept, or deny rental housing applications in order of receipt.
(d) If a landlord maintains a waitlist for filling available dwelling units instead of advertising the availability of dwelling units and using an open application period, the landlord must add applicant names to the waitlist in order of receipt.
(e) When a landlord utilizes a waitlist to fill a dwelling unit vacancy, a landlord may simultaneously process multiple rental housing applications but must accept, conditionally accept, or deny rental housing applications in order of receipt.
(f) If an applicant requires additional time to ensure meaningful access to a rental housing application, the applicant may submit a request for additional time to the landlord. The landlord must document the date and time of the landlord’s receipt of the request for additional time. If the applicant submits a rental housing application within 24 hours from the time of submission of a request for additional time, the date and time of the request for additional time will serve as the date and time of receipt of the rental housing application for purposes of determining the order in which applications are received.
(g) Upon request by an applicant, a landlord must notify the applicant of the applicant’s position in line for a particular dwelling unit.
(h) A landlord must offer tenancy to the first qualified applicant who provides a rental housing application. If that applicant does not accept the offer of tenancy within 48 hours of the time the offer is made, the landlord must review the rental housing applications in order of receipt and make an offer of tenancy to the next qualified applicant who provided a rental housing application. The landlord must repeat this process until an applicant accepts the offer of tenancy.
(i) A landlord may refuse to process rental housing applications that are:
1. Materially incomplete; or
2. Submitted by an applicant who has violated a rental agreement with the landlord three or more times during the 12-month period preceding the date of the application, and the landlord can provide documentation of the violations.
(j) Subparagraphs (a) through (i) of this subsection (16) do not apply to rental housing applications for the following types of dwelling units:
1.  Affordable housing;
2. A dwelling unit occupied by the landlord as the landlord’s principal residence;
3. A unit of middle housing when the landlord’s principal residence is another unit of middle housing on the same lot or parcel;
4. An accessory dwelling unit located on the same lot or parcel as the landlord’s principal residence;
5. A dwelling unit located on the same lot or parcel as an accessory dwelling unit occupied by the landlord as the landlord’s principal residence;
6. A dwelling unit that will be shared with an existing tenant who has a separate rental agreement for the dwelling unit; and
7. A dwelling unit not advertised or rented to the general public.
(k) Nothing in this subsection (16) diminishes or otherwise affects any duty of a landlord under federal, state, or local law to grant a reasonable accommodation to an individual with a disability.
(17) Relocation Assistance. 
(a) Termination Without Cause or for a Landlord Qualifying Reason. 
1. Except for those landlords and tenancies exempt from payment of relocation assistance as provided in subparagraphs (f) and (g) of this subsection (17), and except as provided in subparagraph (b) of this subsection (17), a landlord must comply with the relocation assistance notice and amount requirements in subparagraphs (a)2. and (a)3. of this subsection (17) if the landlord terminates a rental agreement:
a. Without cause during the first year of occupancy as provided in ORS 90.427; or
b. Because the landlord has a qualifying reason for termination under ORS 90.427.
2. Prior to the termination of a rental agreement pursuant to subparagraph (a)1. of this subsection (17), a landlord must deliver a written notice of termination of the rental agreement to each affected tenant. The termination notice must be delivered to the tenant at least 90 days before the termination date designated in the notice. The termination notice must specify the amount of relocation assistance for which the tenant is eligible and must include a description of the tenant’s rights and obligations under this subsection (17).
3. Not less than 45 days prior to the termination date in the notice of termination required by subparagraph (a)2. of this subsection (17), the landlord must pay the tenant relocation assistance in an amount equal to two months’ rent for the dwelling unit. The amount of relocation assistance required by this subsection applies per dwelling unit and not per each individual tenant.
4. A tenant who remains in the dwelling unit after the termination date in the notice of termination required by subparagraph (a)2. of this subsection (17) without the permission of the landlord must immediately repay to the landlord the relocation assistance paid by the landlord pursuant to subparagraph (a)3. of this subsection (17).
(b) Landlord Declines to Renew Fixed Term Rental Agreement. 
1. Except for those landlords and tenancies exempt from payment of relocation assistance as provided in subparagraphs (f) and (g) of this subsection (17), in the case of a fixed term rental agreement with a specified ending date that falls within the first year of a tenant’s occupancy of the dwelling unit, the landlord must, at least 90 days prior to the specified ending date of the fixed term rental agreement, provide the tenant with a written statement informing the tenant of the requirements of subparagraph (b)2.
2. For a tenant to be eligible to receive relocation assistance pursuant to this subparagraph (b), the tenant must, at least 60 days prior to the specified ending date of the fixed term rental agreement, provide the landlord with written notice of the tenant’s desire to renew the fixed term rental agreement.
3. Within 30 days of the date of the notice described in subparagraph (b)2. of this subsection (17), the landlord must either:
a. Provide the tenant written notice that the landlord declines to renew the fixed term rental agreement and pay the tenant relocation assistance in an amount equal to two months’ rent for the dwelling unit; or
b. Provide the tenant written notice that the landlord agrees to renew the fixed term rental agreement.
4. For purposes of this subparagraph (b), a landlord declines to renew a fixed term rental agreement if the landlord conditions the renewal on a tenant’s agreement to a substantial change to the rental agreement.
5. A tenant who agrees to the landlord’s conditions of renewal or who remains in the dwelling unit after the specified ending date in the fixed term rental agreement without the permission of the landlord must immediately repay to the landlord the relocation assistance paid by the landlord pursuant to subparagraph (b)3.a. of this subsection (17).
(c) Rent Increases. 
1. Except for those landlords and tenancies exempt from payment of relocation assistance as provided in subparagraphs (f) and (g) of this subsection (17), a landlord that intends to increase a tenant’s rent by the maximum annual rent increase percentage as set by the State of Oregon pursuant to ORS 90.324 must deliver a written notice of rent increase to each affected tenant at least 90 days before the date of the rent increase designated in the notice. The notice of rent increase must specify the amount of the new rent, the dollar amount by which the rent will increase, the percentage of the increase, and the date the increase will become effective. The notice of rent increase must also specify the amount of relocation assistance for which the tenant is eligible and must include a description of the tenant’s rights and obligations under this subsection (17). Expiration of rent concessions specified in a rental agreement is not considered a rent increase for purposes of this subparagraph (c).
2. A tenant who receives the notice of rent increase required by subparagraph (c)1. of this subsection (17), may, within 30 days of the date of the notice, request in writing relocation assistance from the landlord.
3. If a tenant requests relocation assistance pursuant to subparagraph (c)2. of this subsection (17), the landlord must pay the tenant relocation assistance in an amount equal to two months’ rent for the dwelling unit. The landlord must pay the relocation assistance required by this subparagraph (c)3. at least 45 days prior to the date of the rent increase stated in the rent increase notice required by subparagraph (c)1. of this subsection (17). The relocation assistance required by this subparagraph (c)3. applies per dwelling unit and not per each individual tenant.
4. A tenant who receives relocation assistance pursuant to subparagraph (c)3. of this subsection (17) must, within 45 days of the date of receipt of the relocation assistance, either:
a. Provide the landlord with written notice of termination of the rental agreement and vacate the dwelling unit; or
b. Repay the relocation assistance to the landlord and remain in the dwelling unit, subject to the increased rent as provided in the rent increase notice required by subparagraph (c)1. of this subsection (17).
(d) Relocation Assistance Limited. A tenant may only receive relocation assistance once per tenancy. Receipt and subsequent repayment of relocation assistance pursuant to subparagraph (c)4.b. of this subsection (17) does not count as receipt of relocation assistance for purposes of this subparagraph (d).
(e) Within 60 days of payment of relocation assistance pursuant to this subsection (17), a landlord must report the payment to the city.
(f) The following are exempt from the relocation assistance requirements of this subsection (17) as long as the landlord complies with the requirements of subparagraph (g) of this subsection (17):
1. Week-to-week tenancies;
2. Occupancy of the same dwelling unit by the landlord and tenant where the landlord occupies the dwelling unit as the landlord’s principal residence for at least six months prior to one of the relocation assistance eligible events set forth in subparagraphs (a) – (c) of this subsection (17).
3. Tenants that occupy one unit of middle housing when the landlord’s principal residence is another unit of middle housing on the same lot or parcel and the landlord occupies the unit of middle housing as the landlord’s principal residence for at least six months prior to one of the relocation assistance eligible events set forth in subparagraphs (a) – (c) of this subsection(17).
4. Tenancies where a tenant occupies an accessory dwelling unit and the landlord’s principal residence is located on the same lot or parcel, or tenancies where the landlord occupies the accessory dwelling unit and the tenant occupies a dwelling unit on the same lot or parcel; and the landlord occupies the dwelling unit or accessory dwelling unit as the landlord’s principal residence for at least six months prior to one of the relocation assistance eligible events set forth in subparagraphs (a) – (c) of this subsection (17).
5. A landlord that temporarily rents out the landlord's principal residence during the landlord's absence of not more than 3 years and the landlord returns and reoccupies the dwelling unit as the landlord’s principal residence;
6. A landlord that temporarily rents out the landlord’s principal residence during the landlord’s absence due to active-duty military service the landlord returns and reoccupies the dwelling unit as the landlord’s principal residence;
7. Units of Affordable Housing;
8. A dwelling unit that is subject to and in compliance with the federal Uniform Relocation Assistance and Real Property Acquisition Policies Act of 1970;
9. A dwelling unit rendered immediately uninhabitable not due to the action or inaction of a landlord or tenant;
10. A dwelling unit rented for a period of less than 6 months with appropriate verification of the submission of a demolition permit prior to the execution of the rental agreement;
11. A dwelling unit subject to a fixed term tenancy where the landlord’s intent to sell or permanently convert the dwelling unit to a use other than as a dwelling unit is a term of the executed rental agreement.
(g) In order to qualify for an exemption from the relocation assistance requirements of this subsection (17), a landlord must:
1. For the exemptions specified in subparagraphs (f)1., (f)5., (f)6., (f)7., (f)10., and (f)11. of this subsection (17), no later than the time of execution of the rental agreement, the landlord must provide each tenant who is a party to the rental agreement with written notice that the tenancy is exempt from relocation assistance.
2. For the exemptions specified in subparagraphs (f)2., (f)3., and (f)4. of this subsection (17), where the landlord is living in the dwelling unit or on the lot or parcel at the time of execution of the rental agreement, no later than the time of execution of the rental agreement the landlord must provide each tenant who is a party to the rental agreement with written notice that the tenancy is exempt from relocation assistance. The notice requirement of this subparagraph (g)2. applies to rental agreements executed on or after September 1, 2023.
3. For the exemptions specified in subparagraphs (f)2., (f)3., and (f)4. of this subsection (17), if the landlord moves into the dwelling unit or onto the lot or parcel during the term of the rental agreement, within 30 days of occupying the dwelling unit or the lot or parcel, the landlord must provide each tenant who is a party to the rental agreement with a written notice that the tenancy will be exempt from relocation assistance once the landlord has occupied a dwelling unit on the lot or parcel as the landlord’s principal residence for at least six months. The notice requirement of this subparagraph (g)3. applies to landlords moving into the dwelling unit or onto the lot or parcel on or after September 1, 2023.
4. For the exemptions specified in subparagraphs (f)8. and (f)9. of this subsection (17), at the same time that the landlord provides a notice of termination of the rental agreement, the landlord must provide each tenant who is a party to the rental agreement with a written notice that the tenancy is exempt from relocation assistance.
5. Except for landlords exempt from relocation assistance requirements pursuant to subparagraph (f)7., within 30 days of the date a landlord provides a tenant with the notice of exemption from relocation assistance required by subsections (g)1., (g)2., (g)3., or (g)4. of this subsection (17), the landlord must submit to the city a notice of relocation assistance exemption.
(h) A landlord required to pay relocation assistance pursuant to subparagraphs (a), (b) or (c) of this subsection (17) may subtract from the amount of relocation assistance required by those subparagraphs any amount paid by the landlord to the tenant pursuant to ORS 90.427.
(18) Termination of Tenancy – Reporting. 
(a) Except as provided in subparagraph (c) of this subsection (18), a landlord shall report to the city all of the following:
1. A written notice of termination of a rental agreement that is delivered to the tenant and that results in a termination of tenancy. The landlord shall provide the city with a copy of the termination notice.
2. A tenant who vacates a dwelling unit on or before the date indicated in a written termination notice delivered by the landlord. The landlord shall provide the city with a copy of the termination notice.
3. Legal action taken by the landlord to remove a tenant from a dwelling unit that results in a termination of tenancy.
(b) A report required by subparagraph (a) of this subsection (18) must be filed with the city within 30 days of the date of the applicable action listed in that subsection.
(c) The requirements of subparagraph (a) of this subsection (18) do not apply in the case of a week-to-week tenancy.
(19) Compliance with Laws. Nothing in this section 8.425 diminishes or otherwise affects any duty of a landlord to comply with applicable requirements of federal, state, or local law.
(20) Administrative Rules. The city manager may, pursuant to section 2.019 of this code, adopt administrative rules for implementation of this section 8.425, including rules that prescribe the form and content of the written notices and reports required by this section 8.425.
(21) Interpretations. 
(a) The city manager is empowered to render interpretations of sections 8.400 through 8.440 of this code.
(b) Such interpretations shall be consistent with the purpose of this code.
(Section 8.425 added by Ordinance No. 20329, enacted November 22, 2004, effective December 30, 2004, to sunset December 31, 2008; amended and sunset date extended to December 31, 2011, by Ordinance No. 20408, enacted May 27, 2008, effective June 30, 2008; sunset date extended to September 30, 2012 by Ordinance No. 20480, enacted November 28, 2011, effective December 30, 2011; sunset date extended to September 30, 2016, by Ordinance No. 20494, enacted June 11, 2012, effective July 14, 2012; sunset date extended to March 1, 2017 by Ordinance No. 20568, enacted September 26, 2016, effective September 30, 2016; amended and sunset date removed by Ordinance 20573, enacted January 25, 2017, effective February 26, 2017; Ordinance No. 20670, enacted July 11, 2022, effective August 13, 2022; amended by Ordinance 20694, enacted July 24, 2023, effective August 25, 2023.)
The Eugene Code is current through Ordinance 20723, passed March 10, 2025.
Disclaimer: The city recorder’s office has the official version of the Eugene Code. Users should contact the city recorder’s office for ordinances passed subsequent to the ordinance cited above.
City Website: www.eugene-or.gov
Hosted by General Code.
